---
title: Maya 2017 and PySide 2
tags:
  - Maya
  - Python
  - PySide
  - Qt
---

We're just starting to make the transition over to Maya 2017 at work, running through our existing toolset and making any changes as required. One thing that stands out is that PySide (Maya's Python GUI framework) has been replaced with PySide2! It's great to see Autodesk updating Maya's UI toolkit from Qt4 to Qt5, but as this new version breaks backward compatibility for the Python bindings it does mean all of our UI's will need updating.

Thankfully this is not a huge task, although it's not as simple as replacing `import PySide` with `import PySide2`

The biggest breaking change from PySide (Qt4 bindings) to PySide2 (Qt5) is the creation of the `QtWidgets` module. All widgets that used to be under `QtGui` have been moved into this new module, I would guess this separation is to stop the `QtGui` namespace from becoming bloated in future. There are other [major changes in Qt5](http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/qt5-intro.html) which are worth noting, but it's the changes to PySide that we're interested in for creating Maya UIs.

### Backwards compatibility
Ideally we want to update our tooset to work with PySide2 *but* also not break compatibility with older Maya versions (2012-2016). This is possible with some simple aliases when importing the Pyside modules.

eg
{% highlight python %}
try:
    from PySide2 import QtCore, QtGui, QtWidgets
    from shiboken2 import wrapInstance
except ImportError:
    from PySide import QtCore, QtGui
    from PySide import QtGui as QtWidgets
    from shiboken import wrapInstance
{% endhighlight %}

This way we always get the three core modules `QtCore`, `QtGui` and `QtWidgets` regardless of which version of PySide Maya is using. The only difference being that in the case of `PySide` we are actually importing `QtGui` twice ... once as itself and once again as `QtWidgets`. With this taken care of the only remaining work is to replace any calls to `QtGui` that create widgets to instead call `QtWidgets`.

eg
{% highlight python %}
class My_ui(QtGui.QDialog):
    def __init__(self, parent=None):
        super(My_ui, self).__init__(parent)
        self.menubar = QtGui.QMenuBar()
        self.main_layout = QtGui.QVBoxLayout()
{% endhighlight %}
would need to be rewritten as ...
{% highlight python %}
class My_ui(QtWidgets.QDialog):
    def __init__(self, parent=None):
        super(My_ui, self).__init__(parent)
        self.menubar = QtWidgets.QMenuBar()
        self.main_layout = QtWidgets.QVBoxLayout()
{% endhighlight %}

Be careful though, not everything you'll have used from `QtGui` has moved to `QtWidgets`! Check the PySide/Qt documentation to be sure.
